<p align="center">
          <H3><b>The illusion of structure or insufficiency of approach? the un(3) of unruly problems</b><br> </H3>
Bradly Alicea, Jesse Parent, and Ankit Gupta<br>
          Orthogonal Research and Education Laboratory
</p>

### Introduction  
<p align="center">
          "<i>A little bit of many things, but mostly the things that cannot be easily coded</i>" 
</p>
     
This quote is taken from the description for Dr. Bradly Alicea's Github repository [1]. At first look, this might be the perfect description of a generalist with a range of unruly interests. This is of course a subjective take, but does bring up a conceptual point. Unruliness can be used as a way to describe what we cannot formalize. Unruly problems are messy, but can also include so-called wicked problems [2]. Such problems are hard to represent with mathematics and sometimes even with words. However, they are not inherently qualitative or structureless! As Wigner once proposed that mathematics is unreasonable in its effectiveness [3], so we might also propose that poorly-represented problems have elusive answers. As a contrast, we propose that unruliness is the main way we can identify instances of undecidability, uncomputability, and unpredictability (which we refer to as the un(3) of unruly problems). Once identified, we can analyze such problems using a range of alternative principles and analytical approaches.  

In general, un(3) problems are hard to represent. Yet this is not always for the lack of mathematical tools. Examples include systems with a large number of variables or high degrees of nonlinearity. These types of systems stand in contrast to methods such as experimental design or measurement of nearest-neighbor interactions. Inverse problems of highly-interacting systems such as swarm intelligence can also be classified in this way. While solutions can be proposed, this essay focuses on the need for a new paradigm for solving such problems.  

### What makes a problem hard-to-represent?
The core of problem representation involves separating the subject of observation from that which is being observed, computed, or predicted. This process, which is a form of differentiation between subject and object, is similar to boundary demarcation in systems analysis [4, 5]. In both cases, there is a fundamental difference between systems where differentiation is easy and those in which it is difficult to impossible. This essay deals with the latter case, and in particular what makes such systems so difficult to characterize. Specifically, differentiation serves as an example of difficulties in quantifying, symbolizing, representing, and metaphor-building such systems. At the core of incomplete differentiation is an inability to transmit alternative forms of information to the observer [6]. These alternative forms of information act as redundancies, and allow for the observer to more easily identify patterns and structure in data generated by the system in question.

#### Difficult to quantify
While many problems can be easily quantified, many other problem domains cannot. Even many quantifiable problems do not yield clear quantitative structure. While we study model systems to yield broadly-applicable insights into similar systems, model systems also provide a window into regularities that govern very general natural processes. In this essay, quantitative structure will be limited to separability (gaps and difference), alignment (function and curve-fitting), and correspondence (one set of data points correspond to an analogous set). While these attributes are signatures of quantitative structure, they can also be identified in systems with limited structure. 

Quantitative structure also exists as a signature of dynamic organizational complexity. We can examine this by considering the most extreme alternative to quantitative structure: grey goo [7]. Grey goo (or the complete lack of structure) can be attributed to processes such as runaway autophagy [8] and results in a smearing of categories and distinction. Kaufmann's Noah's Vessel experiment suggests that if all biological cells on earth were ground up and poured into a single vessel, we could test to see if the biocomplexity of cells and multicellular organisms re-establishes itself. While Kaufmann suggests it might be possible due to the contents of our vessel acting like a supercritical fluid [9]. This behavior is driven by interactions at the molecular level, unbounded by cell membranes and other subsystem boundaries. 

From this example, we might assume that grey goo results in a lack of structure. Yet might we suggest that grey goo leads to a different kind of structure: qualitative structure. Qualitative structure is simply structure that cannot be easily identified with quantitative methods. There are also unexplored links between qualitative structure, randomness, and chaos so that random behavior leads to structure that is neither systematic nor replicable. Yet there is even a more fundamental question: do quantitative methods rely upon our perceptual abilities and cultural traditions to impose order upon a system and yield structure? If so, qualitative-quantitative converter models based on models of human cognition could decode much of this transient structure and turn it into quantitative and computable data.  

As we rely on statistical models to identify structure, do we need a new field where different types of metaphors yield unique structural observations, while ensemble models produce consensus views of ontological structure? Clearly we cannot simply rely on ever more sophisticated numeric or symbolic representations. Therefore, we propose a new approach called perceptual analysis that utilizes symbolized metaphors to translate unidentifiable structure into quantitative forms. Perceptual analysis relies on natural processes such as collective behaviors, neuronal functional processes, and the fundamental properties of geometric structures. We might also be able to couple perceptual analysis with verification methods borrowed from conventional mathematics and even fields such as computer security or artificial intelligence safety. While we will discuss the details of perceptual analysis later in this essay would form the basis for a new way to compute, understand nature, and analyze human societies.

#### Difficult to symbolize and represent
Aside from complex systems that are hard to quantify, there are also classes of complex systems that are inherently difficult to symbolize. In the context of a complex system, symbols include mathematical objects such as numbers, operators, and representations of selected features and processes. Symbols provide a path to both theory and measurement. For example, identifiable structure or discreteness can be characterized with a symbol, or symbolized. What we might refer to as symbolization is the description of a complex system as a series of symbols. The quest for symbolization is embodied in Newell and Simon’s Physical Symbol System Hypothesis [10], but as application to the real-world has shown, a symbolization strategy is quite unsuitable for many problem domains.

Nevertheless, symbolization is often a necessary step in the creation of models, theories, programming abstractions, and data structures. Yet computational representation is also required for model-building, and aside from having the same limitations as symbolization, is dependent on available mathematical tools and cultural biases [11]. For example, one obstacle to symbolization and representation is the ability to use metaphors to casually describe the dynamics of a complex system. These metaphors might also be intentionally selected because they provide easy access to the language of quantification. Julian Jaynes [12] considered theories to be metaphors between model and data. Therefore, we must also consider the metaphors we use to create theories and interpret data. Simply extending existing models and metaphors to data is simply insufficient. Even physical metaphors are insufficient to the task of making quantification easier. In the next section, we will explicitly discuss problems for which there is no physical analogue. 

Another stumbling block to symbolization are so-called "wicked" problems [2]. Wicked problems incorporate many different system types, but have been characterized by large social problems such as a planned economy, social change and persistence, or complex systems with many parallel components [13]. Why are wicked problems so difficult to address? Let us consider one example of a wicked problem: urban dynamics. In the attempts to solve this problem, a variety of top-down approaches have been taken, including systems dynamics [14] and machine learning [15]. Yet such approaches still only cast a broad net over the particulars sources of variation in the system. In addition, many of the variables and phenomena needed to characterize the problem are not predictable. While it is tempting to suggest that these phenomena simply exist in a chaotic regime, it is more likely that unpredictable components are variables that produce unstructured but nevertheless important information in a system that exhibits structure.  

#### Un-physical problems (no physical analogue)  
We often use physical analogues to address complex biological and social problems. Examples include the brain and neurological function as a "computer", "velocity" of spent money, "jet engines" that propel organisms through water or air, or "gas" models of social interactions. But how physical are these systems, and do analogues provide insight? Even if the physical analogy does hold, to what extent is the physical analogue only modeling or speaking to a fraction of the structure in our system relative to a holistic view? This was discussed earlier in the difficult to quantify section. Un-physical problems pose a unique challenge in this respect: the structure is not merely transient, but reliant on a global view in space and time. Therefore, a subset of un-physical problems are those that cannot be abstracted easily into computational form.

Returning to the issue of physical versus non-physical systems, we can compare phenomena that are psychophysical versus phenomena that are metaphysical. Psychophysical phenomena are interactions between the human perceptual system and regularities that result from physical features of the stimulus. By contrast, metaphysical phenomena are those which cannot be mapped to an objective frame of reference. An example of this could be a cultural representation of an object’s physical attributes that do not map to physical laws [16]. Examples of metaphysical representations can often be found in video games and religious myths. In both physical and metaphysical representations, a physical analogue would require at least an intermediate layer to translate the physical process to another type of process. This secondary process might be semi-physical (such as a set of pathways in the brain) or not at all physical (philosophical narrative). In any case, the broad application of physical metaphors offer a sometimes suboptimal series of trade-offs between quantification, symbolization, and understandability. 

It may also be that such metaphors rest on systems that are easy to quantify and symbolize. Systems with discrete parts, consistent outputs, and deterministic behaviors fall into such a category. Returning to our discussion on symbolization, metaphors that are easy to symbolize but otherwise poorly descriptive of process complexity are actually preferable. Yet this is done at significant cost to realism. In the realm of Diatom biomechanics (multicellular motility), we have witnessed a history of diverse metaphors [17] being used to describe organism-level movement and structural function. Potential mechanisms include jet engines, rowing ships, bubble-driven movement, treadmilling, compressed air-driven movement, and explosive propulsion. While not all of them are equally plausible, the diverse interpretations of a singular biophysical phenomenon is evidence that even something that is straightforwardly physical (diatom motility) is actually quite hard to symbolize.

### Open Questions to Address    
There are three focused research questions we can ask with respect to establishing a set of investigative approaches that transcend the limitations of quantification, symbolization, and physical analogy. These involve the potential for new models, logical frameworks, and replication of experimental methods. They are as follows:

How can we represent such problems both symbolically and operationally? Is there a type of logical framework that might supersede conventional mathematics in these cases?

Do we need new models for computation that are allied with continuous and stochastic methods, or can our current models sufficiently account for difficult-to-characterize or even wicked problems?  

Is there a connection with the ability to replicate experiments? In the case of experiments that are found not to replicate, is there a methodological problem, or is it a matter of not using the proper representation (what are key variables, or what is key mode of inquiry)? 

### Is a new paradigm for measurement and computation the answer?
In this essay, we have learned that a wide variety of systems have components that are difficult to characterize at an epistemic level. Certain problems have a structure that are simply not amenable to conventional mathematical approaches. Yanofsky [18] demonstrates this through the example of solving Zeno’s paradoxes. While these paradoxes can be solved through the introduction of novel ideas, these new approaches are not always compatible with contemporary mathematical and empirical tools. 

When this example is coupled with complexity in the form of problems that are wicked, difficult to symbolize, and difficult to represent, it is no wonder that un(3) phenomena rear their head. This leads us to propose a new paradigm (perceptual analysis) for understanding empirical and conceptual limitations posed by this essay. Perceptual analysis is a heterodox mix of neural-inspired modeling, visualization-based feature selection, and soft computation. While this new computational and quantitative paradigm may be at times hard to reconcile with more conventional mathematics and computer science, it may help us overcome some of the limitations of tradition. An outline of four approaches to perceptual statistics are as follows:

1) The development of continuous (or hybrid continuous/discrete) methods that use the behavior of fluids, biological collectives, or soft materials as inspiration. While continuous approximation has become increasingly easier with advances in computing technology, this requires an ability to capture the phenomenon of interest using methods that make such systems quantifiable. To bridge this conceptual gap, we can map such systems onto fluids, biological collectives [19], and soft materials [20]. While these mappings are quasi-quantitative, our mathematical understanding of such systems are a bit more tractable than the alternative.  

2) The identification and representation of intervals that allow us to find patterns in stochastic sequences. Another way in which difficult to quantify systems can be turned into mathematical grist is through interval and difference computing [21]. Interval and difference computing requires us to define these features in the system of interest. One promising technique is to use the features of natural systems as a tool for computation. Interval computation can be done in this way using neural models [22] and neural-inspired models such as dendritic computing [23]. Neural-inspired models offer a key advantage to unlocking new analytical vistas. While they are similar to neural networks in terms of function, neural-inspired models are also not constrained to the typical neural network representation.

3) The construction of nested and overlapping shapes, in addition to geometric generativity and isometric networks, can be used to represent sets of relationships that possess non-transitive properties, recursivity, and co-varying higher dimensionality. We will discuss isometric networks first. Isometric networks consist of a series of interconnected isometric shapes. Isometric geometries have been used in artistic representation, video game design, machine learning [24], and topological physics [25]. Isometric networks are drawn in two dimensions, but due to their orientation, project three dimensions of information. Due to this projection, the second and third dimensions are entangled, leading to shared variance amongst both dimensions.  

While isometric networks can represent transitive relationships, we can configure such networks (and particularly their growth) in such a way so as to introduce non-transitive elements. Nested and overlapping shapes drawn as a generative landscape might be a way to introduce such properties. Much as injecting stochasticity into boolean models make them more lifelike, so can injecting generativity into simple geometric systems gets us closer to what Douglas Hofstadter refers to as a strange loop [26].  
     
4) As traditional statistical methods allow us to discover correlations and correspondences, we might also want to discover freer associations that are harder to define in terms of curve-fitting or formal statistical tests. This can be done by considering exotic methods such as vague soft sets [27] and neural associative coding [28]. More generally, we can use fuzzy logic and interval measures [29] to characterize multidimensional space. Such representations allow us to build representations robust to the limitations discussed in this essay, and can also be used to facilitate interval and difference computing. 

## Conclusions
Returning to the title of this essay, we can pose a final question: are un(3) phenomena due to a lack of structure or insufficient approaches to hidden structure? Based on our assessment, the answer is clear. An enhanced ability to identify and characterize such systems allows us to approximate a solution to un(3) problems, but does not solve them. Select problems (such as wicked problems) might be unsolvable in the conventional sense. At best, we can offer means by which to allow more differentiation and thereby more information to be gained through expanding these techniques and approaches. To increase awareness of this, we have laid out the reasons why such problems are hard-to-represent, open questions that arise from these limitations, and a potential new paradigm for taming the unruliness of un(3) problem domains. Further work involves refining the application of these analytical solutions to a new paradigm.

## Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the Saturday Morning NeuroSim group (YouTube: https://tinyurl.com/Sat-Morning-NeuroSim) for their comments and time to discuss the development of this essay. Additional thanks go to Aidan Rocke for his discussion and commentary on many problems related to what is presented here.

## References
[1] URL: http://www.github.com/balicea

[2] Brown, V.A., Harris, J.A., and Russell, J.Y. (2010). Tackling Wicked Problems: through the transdisciplinary imagination. Earthscan, London.

[3] Wigner, E.P. (1960). The unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the natural sciences. _Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics_, 13: 1–14. 

[4] Zeleny, M. and Hufford, K.D. (1991). All Autopoietic Systems Must be Social Systems (living implies autopoietic. But, autopoietic does not imply living): an application of autopoietic criteria in systems analysis. _Journal of Social and Biological Structures_, 14(3), 311-332.

[5] Khalil, E.L. and Boulding, K.E. (1996). Evolution, Order and Complexity. Routledge, London, UK.

[6] Wiener, N. (1961). Cybernetics, or control and communication in the animal and the machine. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

[7] Drexler, K.E. (1992). Nanosystems: molecular machinery, manufacturing, and computation. Wiley, New York.

[8] Glick, D., Barth, S., and Macleod, K.F. (2010). Autophagy: cellular and molecular mechanisms. _Journal of Pathology_, 221(1), 3–12. doi:10.1002/path.2697.

[9]  Kauffman, S. (1995). At Home in the Universe: the search for the laws of self-organization and order. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.

[10] Newell, A. and Simon, H.A. (1976). Computer Science as Empirical Inquiry: symbols and search. _Communications of the ACM_, 19(3), 113–126. doi:10.1145/360018.360022

[11] Fishwick, P. (2017). Modeling as the Practice of Representation. In _Proceedings of the 2017 Winter Simulation Conference_, W.K.V. Chan, A. D'Ambrogio, G. Zacharewicz, N. Mustafee, G. Wainer, and E. Page, eds., pgs. 4276-4287.

[12] Jaynes, J. (2000). The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind. Mariner Books.

[13] Rittel, H.W. and Webber, M.M. (1973). Dilemmas in a general theory of planning. _Policy Sciences_, 4(2), 155-169.

[14] Forrester, J.W. (1969). Urban Dynamics. Pegasus Books, New York.

[15] Kempinska, K. (2019). Machine learning for modelling urban dynamics. Doctoral thesis, University College London. 

[16] Alicea, B. (2012). Contextual Geometric Structures: modeling the fundamental components of cultural behavior. _Proceedings of Artificial Life_, 13, 147-154

[17] Gordon, R. (2020). The whimsical history of proposed motors for diatom motility. In: Diatom
Gliding Motility [DIGM, Volume in the series: Diatoms: Biology & Applications, series editors: Richard Gordon & Joseph Seckbach]. S.A. Cohn, K.M. Manoylov and R. Gordon, (eds.) Wiley-Scrivener, Beverly, MA, USA: Submitted.

[18] Yanofsky, N.S. (2013). Outer Limits of Reason: what science, mathematics, and logic cannot tell us. MIT Press, Cambridge MA. 

[19] Ab Wahab, M.N., Nefti-Meziani, S., and Atyabi, A. (2015). A Comprehensive Review of Swarm Optimization Algorithms. _PLoS One_, 10(5), e0122827.

[20] Van der Gucht, J. (2018). Grand Challenges in Soft Matter Physics. _Frontiers in Physics_, doi:10.3389/fphy.2018.00087.

[21] Rokne, J.G. (2001). Interval Arithmetic and Interval Analysis: An Introduction. In "Granular Computing", W. Pedrycz ed., pp. 1-22. Springer, Berlin. 

[22] Rose, G.J., Leary, C.J., and Edwards, C.J. (2011). Interval-counting Neurons in the Anuran Auditory Midbrain: Factors Underlying Diversity of Interval Tuning. _Journal of Computation and Physiology A_, 197(1), 97-108.

[23] Mel, B.W. (1994). Information Processing in Dendritic Trees. _Neural Computation_, 6(6), 1031-1085. doi:10.1162/neco.1994.6.6.1031.

[24] Khasanova, R. and Frossard, P. (2019). Isometric Transformation Invariant Graph-based Deep Neural Network. _arXiv_, 1808.07366.

[25] Soejima, T., Siva, K., Bultinck, N., Chatterjee, S., Pollmann, F., and Zaletel, M.F. (2020). Isometric tensor network representation of string-net liquids. _Physical Review B_, 101, 085117.

[26] Hofstadter, D. (2007). I Am A Strange Loop. Basic Books, New York.

[27] Xu, W., Ma, J., Wang, S., and Hao, G. (2010). Vague soft sets and their properties. _Computers & Mathematics with Applications_, 59(2), 787-794.

[28] Palm, G. (2013). Neural associative memories and sparse coding. _Neural Networks_, 37, 165-171.

[29] Castillo, O. and Melin, P. (2014). A review on interval type-2 fuzzy logic applications in intelligent control. _Information Sciences_, 279, 615-631.  
